[Doc] Refactor debugging (#6102)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/debug/debugging.md

# Debugging

Taichi provides the following built-in utilities to facilitate parallel programming debugging:

- `print` in the Taichi scope checks the value of a variable.
- Serialization of your program or a specific parallel for loop.

> - Activated with `ti.init(debug=True)`, debug mode detects out-of-bound array accesses,

Author: ```suggestion
- Activated with `ti.init(debug=True)`, debug mode detects out-of-bound array accesses.
```

> - `debug=TRUE`, which detects out-of-bound array accesses,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- run in the debug mode via `ti.init(debug=TRUE)`, which can detect out-of-bound array accesses,
```

- static or non-static `assert`, which verifies an assertion condition at compile time or runtime respectively,

> - `sys.tracebacklimit`, which produces a more concise traceback

Author: ```suggestion
- `sys.tracebacklimit` produces a conciser traceback.
```

Debugging a parallel program is not easy, so Taichi provides built-in

> utilities that could hopefully help you debug your Taichi program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
utilities that help you debug your Taichi program.
```

    #=> ray.ori = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0], ray.dir = [0.0, 0.0, 1.0], ray.len = 1.0
```

For now, `print`, when placed in the Taichi scope, can take string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments. It behaves differently depending on the scope where it is called, as detailed below.

### Applicable backends

> `print` in the Taichi scope is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, OpenGL, and Metal backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`print` in the Taichi scope is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, and Vulkan backends.
```
`print` is not supported on opengl and metal backends.

Note that `print` does not work in Graphical
Python Shells, including IDLE and Jupyter Notebook, when the program is running on **CPU or CUDA**. This is because these

> backends print the outputs to the console instead of GUI. Choose the **OpenGL or Metal backend** if you wish to use `print` in IDLE /

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backends print the outputs to the console instead of GUI.
```

### Applicable backends

`print` in the Taichi scope is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, and Vulkan backends only.

Note that `print` does not work in Graphical

> Python Shells, including IDLE and Jupyter Notebook, when the program is running on **CPU or CUDA**. This is because these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `print` does not work in Graphical
Python Shells, including IDLE and Jupyter Notebook. This is because these
```

    #=> ray.ori = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0], ray.dir = [0.0, 0.0, 1.0], ray.len = 1.0
```

> For now, `print`, when placed in the Taichi scope, can take string, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments. It behaves differently depending on the scope where it is called, as detailed below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now, `print`, when placed in the Taichi scope, can take string literal, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments. It behaves differently depending on the scope where it is called, as detailed below.
```

> For now, `print`, when placed in the Taichi scope, can take string literal, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments. It behaves differently depending on the scope where it is called, as detailed below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Behaviors of `print` vary depending on the scope where it is called. When called from within the Taichi scope, `print` can take string literal, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments.
```
You need to sort out the causal relations in the paragraph. @neozhaoliang Please double check.

matrix expressions as arguments. `print` in Taichi-scope may be a little
different from `print` in Python-scope. Please see the details below.

:::note
`print` in Taichi-scope is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, OpenGL, and Metal backends.
:::
For now, `print`, when placed in the Taichi scope, can take string literal, scalar, vector, and matrix expressions as arguments. It behaves differently depending on the scope where it is called, as detailed below.

:::caution
For the **CPU and CUDA backends**, `print` will not work in Graphical
Python Shells including IDLE and Jupyter notebook. This is because these
backends print the outputs to the console instead of the GUI. Use the
**OpenGL or Metal backend** if you wish to use `print` in IDLE /
Jupyter.
:::
### Applicable backends

:::caution
`print` in the Taichi scope is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, and Vulkan backends only.

> For the **CUDA backend**, the printed result will not show up until

Author: @neozhaoliang suggests this part of information is outdated.

def foo():
    a[0] = 1.0
    print('a[0] = ', a[0]) # right
    print(f'a[0] = {a[0]}') # wrong: f-strings are not supported
    print("a[0] = %f" % a[0]) # wrong: formatted strings are not supported

foo()
```

## Compile-time `ti.static_print`

> It can be useful to print Python objects and their properties like data types or SNodes in the Taichi scope. Based on `ti.static` (see [Metaprogramming](../advanced/meta.md)), Taichi provides `ti.static_print` to print compile-time constants in the Taichi scope:

Author: ```suggestion
It can be useful to print Python objects and their properties like data types or SNodes in the Taichi scope. Similar to `ti.static`, which makes the compiler evaluate an argument at compile time (see the [Metaprogramming](../advanced/meta.md) for more information), `ti.static_print` prints compile-time constants in the Taichi scope:
```

> print('after sync')

Reviewer: No longer need to call `ti.sync()` to get print work on cuda now.

    for i in range(4):
        ti.static_print(i.dtype)
        # => DataType.int32
        # Only print once
```

`ti.static_print` behaves similarly with `print` in the Python scope. The difference is that unlike `print`, `ti.static_print` only prints the expression once at compile time, thus incurring no runtime cost.

## Serial execution

> Taichi's automatic parallelization mechanism may lead to non-deterministic behaviors. For debugging purposes, serializing program execution may be useful to get repeatable results and diagnose data races. You can serialize either an entire Taichi program or a specific for loop.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Taichi's automatic parallelization mechanism may lead to non-deterministic behaviors. For debugging purposes, serializing program execution may be useful for getting repeatable results or diagnosing data races. You can serialize either the entire Taichi program or a specific for loop.
```

### Serialize an entire Taichi program

> If you choose CPU as the backend, you can serialize the program with `cpu_max_num_threads=1` when initiating Taichi, so that the whole program runs on a single thread and becomes deterministic. For example:

Reviewer 3: If you choose your backend as CPU, you can set `cpu_max_num_thread=1` when initializing Taichi to serialize the program. Then the program runs on a single thread and its behavior becomes deterministic. For example:

```python
ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, cpu_max_num_threads=1)
```

If your program works well in serial but fails in parallel, check parallelization-related issues, such as data races.

### Serialize a specified parallel for loop

> By default, Taichi automatically parallelizes the for loop at the outermost scope. But some scenarios require serial exeution. In this case, you can prevent automatic parallelization with `ti.loop_config(serialize=True)`:

Reviewer 3: Taichi automatically parallelizes the for loops at the outermost scope in a Taichi kernel. But xxx

```python
import taichi as ti

ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
n = 1024
val = ti.field(dtype=ti.i32, shape=n)

val.fill(1)

@ti.kernel
def prefix_sum():
    ti.loop_config(serialize=True) # Serialize the for loop
    for i in range(1, n):
        val[i] += val[i - 1]

prefix_sum()
print(val)
```

:::note

- `ti.loop_config(serialize=True)` decorates the outermost for loop that immediately follows it.
- `ti.loop_config` works only for the *range-for* loop at the outermost scope.
- Inner for loops are serialized by default.

:::

## Out-of-bound array access

The array access violation issue is common, but a program would usually proceed without raising a warning, only to end up with a wrong result. Even if a segmentation fault were triggered, it would be hard to debug.

Taichi makes out-of-bound array accesses readily detectable with an auto-debugging mode. Activate the mode by setting `debug=True` when initiating Taichi:

```python
import taichi as ti
ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)
f = ti.field(dtype=ti.i32, shape=(32, 32))
@ti.kernel
def test() -> ti.i32:
    return f[0, 73]

print(test())
```

> The code snippet above raises a `TaichiAssertionError` indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code snippet above raises a `TaichiAssertionError`, indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.
```

:::note
Automatic bound checks are supported on the CPU and CUDA beckends only.

> After `debug=Ture` is turned on, your program performance may worsen.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your program performance may worsen if you set `debug=True`. 
```
The Ture here is a typo.

Reviewer 3: Use active voice.

:::

## Runtime `assert` in Taichi scope

You can use `assert` statements in the Taichi scope to verify the assertion conditions. If an assertion fails, the program halts and throws a `TaichiAssertionError`.

:::note
`assert` is currently supported on the CPU, CUDA, and Metal backends.
:::

> Make sure you activate the `debug` mode before using `assert` statements in the Taichi scope:

Author: ```suggestion
Ensure that you activate `debug` mode before using `assert` statements in the Taichi scope:
```

    for i in range(4):
        ti.static_print(i.dtype)
        # => DataType.int32
        # Only print once
```

`ti.static_print` behaves similarly to `print` in the Python scope. The difference is that, unlike `print`, `ti.static_print` prints the expression only once at compile time, thus incurring no runtime cost.

## Serial execution

Taichi's automatic parallelization mechanism may lead to non-deterministic behaviors. For debugging purposes, serializing program execution may be useful for getting repeatable results or diagnosing data races. You can serialize either the entire Taichi program or a specific for loop.

### Serialize an entire Taichi program

> If you choose CPU as the backend, you can serialize the program with `cpu_max_num_threads=1` when initiating Taichi, so that the whole program runs on a single thread and becomes deterministic. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
If you choose your backend as CPU, you can set cpu_max_num_thread=1 when initializing Taichi to serialize the program. Then the program runs on a single thread and its behavior becomes deterministic. For example:
```

>         # will only print once

Author: ```suggestion
        # Only print once
```

```

`ti.static_print` behaves similarly with `print` in the Python scope. The difference is that unlike `print`, `ti.static_print` only prints the expression once at compile time, thus incurring no runtime cost.

## Serial execution

Taichi's automatic parallelization mechanism may lead to non-deterministic behaviors. For debugging purposes, serializing program execution may be useful to get repeatable results and diagnose data races. You can serialize either an entire Taichi program or a specific for loop.

> ### Serialize entire Taichi program

Author: ```suggestion
### Serialize an entire Taichi program
```

If you choose CPU as the backend, you can serialize the program with `cpu_max_num_threads=1` when initiating Taichi, so that the whole program runs on a single thread and becomes deterministic. For example:

```python
ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, cpu_max_num_threads=1)
```

If your program works well in serial but fails in parallel, check parallelization-related issues, such as data races.

> ### Serialize the for loop at the outermost scope

Author: ```suggestion
### Serialize a specified parallel for loop
```

By default, Taichi automatically parallelizes the for loop at the outermost scope. But some scenarios require serial exeution. In this case, you can prevent automatic parallelization with `ti.loop_config(serialize=True)`:

```python
import taichi as ti

ti.init(arch=ti.cpu)
n = 1024
val = ti.field(dtype=ti.i32, shape=n)

val.fill(1)

@ti.kernel
def prefix_sum():

>     ti.loop_config(serialize=True) # serialize the for loop

Author: ```suggestion
    ti.loop_config(serialize=True) # Serialize the for loop
```

    for i in range(1, n):
        val[i] += val[i - 1]

prefix_sum()
print(val)
```

:::note

1. `ti.loop_config(serialize=True)` decorates the outermost for loop that immediately follows it.
2. `ti.loop_config` works only for the *range-for* loop at the outermost scope.
3. Inner for loops are serialized by default.

:::

## Out-of-bound array access

The array access violation issue is common, but a program would usually proceed without raising a warning, only to end up with a wrong result. Even if a segmentation fault were triggered, it would be hard to debug.

> Taichi makes out-of-bound array accesses readily detectable with an auto-debugging mode. You can activate the mode by setting `debug=True` when initiating Taichi. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
Taichi makes out-of-bound array accesses readily detectable with an auto-debugging mode. Activate the mode by setting `debug=True` when initiating Taichi:
```

```python
import taichi as ti
ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)
f = ti.field(dtype=ti.i32, shape=(32, 32))
@ti.kernel
def test() -> ti.i32:
    return f[0, 73]

print(test())
```

> The code snippet above would raise a `TaichiAssertionError` indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.

Author: ```suggestion
The code snippet above raises a `TaichiAssertionError` indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.
```

:::note
Automatic bound checks are supported on the CPU and CUDA beckends only.

After `debug=Ture` is turned on, your program performance may worsen.
:::

## Runtime `assert` in Taichi scope

> You can use `assert` statements in the Taichi scope to verify the assertion conditions. If an assertion fails, the program will halt and throw a `TaichiAssertionError`.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use `assert` statements in the Taichi scope to verify the assertion conditions. If an assertion fails, the program halts and throws a `TaichiAssertionError`.
```

If your program works well in serial but not in parallel, check
parallelization-related issues such as data races.

## Out-of-bound array access

The array access violation issue is common, but a program would usually proceed without raising a warning, only to end up with a wrong result. Even if a segmentation fault were triggered, it would be hard to debug.

Taichi makes out-of-bound array accesses readily detectable with an auto-debugging mode. You can activate the mode by setting `debug=True` when initiating Taichi. For example:

```python
import taichi as ti
ti.init(arch=ti.cpu, debug=True)
f = ti.field(dtype=ti.i32, shape=(32, 32))
@ti.kernel
def test() -> ti.i32:
    return f[0, 73]

print(test())
```

> It would bring about a `TaichiAssertionError` indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would raise a `TaichiAssertionError` indicating that you are trying to access a field with improper indices.
```

def do_sqrt_all():
    for i in x:
        assert x[i] >= 0
        x[i] = ti.sqrt(x[i])
```

> When you are done with debugging, set `debug=False`, and then the program ignores the subsequent `assert` statements and avoid additional runtime overhead.

Author: I think the original meaning is preserved...

> When you are done with debugging, set `debug=False`, and then the program will ignore the subsequent `assert` statements and avoid additional runtime overhead.

Author: ```suggestion
When you are done with debugging, set `debug=False`, and then the program ignores the subsequent `assert` statements and avoid additional runtime overhead.
```

## Compile-time `ti.static_assert`

```python
ti.static_assert(cond, msg=None)
```

> Like `ti.static_print`, Taichi also provides a static version of `assert`: `ti.static_assert`, which comes handy to assert data types, dimensionality, and shapes. It works regardless whether `debug=True` is enabled or not. A false statement triggers an `AssertionError`, just as `assert` in the Python scope does.

Author: ```suggestion
Like `ti.static_print`, Taichi also provides a static version of `assert`: `ti.static_assert`, which comes handy to assert data types, dimensionality, and shapes. It works regardless of whether `debug=True` is enabled or not. A false statement triggers an `AssertionError`, just as `assert` in the Python scope does.
```

> Like `ti.static_print`, Taichi also provides a static version of `assert`: `ti.static_assert`, which comes handy to assert data types, dimensionality, and shapes. It works regardless of whether `debug=True` is enabled or not. A false statement triggers an `AssertionError`, just as `assert` in the Python scope does.

Reviewer 3: With "like `ti.static_print`", I would expect the subject of the main clause to be `ti.static_assert`.

Reviewer 3: “Comes handy" is not the word choice for a technical document.

> Like `ti.static_print`, Taichi also provides a static version of `assert`: `ti.static_assert`, which comes handy to assert data types, dimensionality, and shapes. It works regardless of whether `debug=True` is enabled or not. A false statement triggers an `AssertionError`, just as `assert` in the Python scope does.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Like `ti.static_print`, Taichi also provides a static version of `assert`: `ti.static_assert`, which is useful to make assertions on data types, dimensionality, and shapes. It works regardless of whether `debug=True` is set or not. A false statement of `ti.static_assert` triggers an `AssertionError`, just as a false `assert` statement in the Python scope does.
```

>         x[i] = ti.sqrt(x)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        x[i] = ti.sqrt(x[i])
```

    ti.static_assert(dst.shape == src.shape, "copy() needs src and dst fields to be same shape")
    for I in ti.grouped(src):
        dst[I] = src[I]
```

> ## More concise traceback in Taichi scope

Author: ```suggestion
## Conciser tracebacks in Taichi scope
```

>     return x % 2 == 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

func0()
```

> The above snippet triggers an `AssertionError`, with a lengthy and overwhelming traceback message:

Author: ```suggestion
The above snippet triggers an `AssertionError`, with a lengthy traceback message:
```

> The above snippet would trigger an `AssertionError`, with a lenthy and overwhelming traceback message:

Author: ```suggestion
The above snippet triggers an `AssertionError`, with a lengthy and overwhelming traceback message:
```

...
```

It takes time to read through the message. In addition, many stack frames reveal implementation details, which are irrelevant to debugging.

> Taichi allows you to access a more concise and intuitive version of traceback messages via `sys.tracebacklimit`:

Author: ```suggestion
Taichi allows you to access a conciser and more intuitive version of traceback messages via `sys.tracebacklimit`:
```

> To relieve your burden, Taichi allows you to access a more concise and intuitive version of traceback messages via `sys.tracebacklimit`:

Author: ```suggestion
Taichi allows you to access a more concise and intuitive version of traceback messages via `sys.tracebacklimit`:
```

...
```

> You will get the following information:

Author: ```suggestion
The traceback contains the following information only:
```

buggy()
```

> The code above results in an unexpected result due to a misuse of Taichi's static typing system. The Taichi compiler should show a warning:

Author: ```suggestion
The code above leads to an unexpected result due to a misuse of Taichi's static typing system. The Taichi compiler should show a warning:
```

### Advanced Optimization

> Taichi runs a handful of advanced IR optimizations by default to make your Taichi kernels as performant as possible. However, advanced optimizations may occasionally lead to compilation errors, such as the following:

Author: ```suggestion
Taichi runs a handful of advanced IR optimizations by default to make your Taichi kernels as performant as possible. However, advanced optimizations may occasionally lead to compilation errors, such as:
```

`RuntimeError: [verify.cpp:basic_verify@40] stmt 8 cannot have operand 7.`

> You can turn off the advanced optimizations by setting `ti.init(advanced_optimization=False)` and see if it makes a difference. If the issue persists, please feel free to report it on [GitHub](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md).

Author: ```suggestion
You can turn off the advanced optimizations by setting `ti.init(advanced_optimization=False)` and see if it makes a difference. If the issue persists, feel free to report it on [GitHub](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/issues/new?labels=potential+bug&template=bug_report.md).
```
